The CommonConcepts package is a **standard library** of common business features, implemented as a domain-specific programming language (DSL). It is a recommended package to include in all Rhetos applications.

The DSL defined by CommonConcepts is extended by other Rhetos DSL packages, by adding new business features (new DSL concepts) or new technology implementations for existing concepts.

Contents:

1. [Data model and relationships](#data-model-and-relationships)
2. [Simple business rules](#simple-business-rules)
3. [Computed data and read-only data structures](#computed-data-and-read-only-data-structures)
4. [Filters and other read methods](#filters-and-other-read-methods)
5. [Reports](#reports)
6. [Complex concepts](#complex-concepts)
7. [Server actions](#server-actions)
8. [Claims and permissions](#claims-and-permissions)
9. [Low-level object model concepts](#low-level-object-model-concepts)
10. [Database objects](#database-objects)

## Data model and relationships

[Data model](Data-model-and-relationships):

* **Module** `<name>` - Generates a C# namespace and a database schema.
* **DataStructure** `<Module>.<name>` - Basic concept for any data structure (e.g. Entity, Browse, Computed, ...) which may contain properties. It is usually not directly used in DSL scripts.
* **Entity** `<Module>.<name>` - Represents data entered by a user or generated by the system. Creates a C# class and database table. Inherits the DataStructure concept.

[Simple property types](Data-structure-properties):

* **ShortString** `<DataStructure>.<property name>` - Unicode string property, intended for short single-line text. Maximal length 256 characters.
* **LongString** `<DataStructure>.<property name>` - Unicode string property, intended for long multi-line text. Length is not limited by the application.
* **Integer** `<DataStructure>.<property name>` - Integer property.
* **Decimal** `<DataStructure>.<property name>` - Decimal property.
* **Money** `<DataStructure>.<property name>` - Currency value property, limited to 2 decimals in database.
* **Bool** `<DataStructure>.<property name>` - Boolean property.
* **Date** `<DataStructure>.<property name>` - Date property.
* **DateTime** `<DataStructure>.<property name>` - DateTime property.
* **Guid** `<DataStructure>.<property name>` - GUID property.
* **Binary** `<DataStructure>.<property name>` - Byte array property.

[Relationships](Data-model-and-relationships) and [navigation properties](Data-structure-properties):

* **Reference** `<DataStructure>.<property name> <referenced data structure>` - Lookup field (N:1 relationship). The generated C# property has type of the referenced class. Generates foreign key constraint in database. The database column has "ID" suffix.
* **Reference** `<DataStructure>.<property name>` - Simplified syntax in case when the property name is same as the name of the referenced entity.
* **Detail** `<Reference>` - Marks entity as detail of the referenced entity. Generates Required, SqlIndex and CascadeDelete.
* **Extends** `<extension DataStructure>.<base DataStructure>` - Marks first data structure as an extension of the base data structure (1:1 relationship). Often used to extend entity with additional computed data. The extension records have the same primary key value as the base records.
* **UniqueReference** `<DataStructure>.<property name> <referenced data structure>` - Same as reference but with one-to-one relationship. Use instead of Extends when the extended entity should not be a part of the base entity.
* **LinkedItems** `<DataStructure>.<property name> <detail Reference>` - A property that contains a list of detail records.
* **CascadeDelete** `<Reference>` - When deleting the referenced record, the related detail records will be automatically deleted.

[Browse](Read-only-data-structures):

* **Browse** `<Module>.<name> <original data structure>` - Data structure used for simple data queries, when we only need to select some properties from an entity and other referenced data structures.
* **Take** `<Browse>.<property name or reference path>` - Creates a property on the browse data structure that returns the property value from the base data structure. Instead of a simple property, it is possible to specify a path across multiple references, separated by a dot.
  * The resulting property name is automatically generated by connecting the names from the path (e.g. `Take 'Parent.Organization.Name'` will result with property `ParentOrganizationName`).
* **Take** `<Browse>.<property name> <reference path>` - Explicitly set the name of created property.
* **Snowflake** - Obsolete. Use `Browse` instead.

Hardcoded:

* **Hardcoded** `<Module>.<name>` - Data structure that represents a simple read-only entity or a code table.
* **Entry** `<Hardcoded>.<entry name>` - Creates a row in the database for every entry.
* **Value** `<Entry>.<property name> <value>` - Adds the value to the column.

LegacyEntity:

* **LegacyEntity** `<Module>.<name> <table> <view>` - Simplifies access from Rhetos application to legacy application database. It maps a Rhetos data structure to the legacy database table or view. It allows both read and write operations (either with updateable views or generated instead-of triggers). It allows mapping of complex primary and foreign keys to standard Rhetos reference properties. Prerequisites: The legacy table needs to be extended with `uniqueidentifier` ID column with default `NEWID()` and a unique index.
* **LegacyEntity** `<Module>.<name> <table>` - Simplifies access from Rhetos application to legacy application database. It maps a Rhetos data structure to the legacy database table or view. It allows both read and write operations (either with updateable views or generated instead-of triggers). It allows mapping of complex primary and foreign keys to standard Rhetos reference properties. Prerequisites: The legacy table needs to be extended with `uniqueidentifier` ID column with default `NEWID()` and a unique index. Automatically creates view with entity name and the corresponding instead-of triggers for writing data directly into that view.
* **LegacyProperty** `<Property> 'column'` - Mapping a writable property to a column in source view. It also extends the generated triggers, making the view writable.
* **LegacyProperty** `<Property> 'columns' 'referencedTable' 'referencedColumns'` - Mapping reference property to a FK column in source view. It supports foreign keys over multiple columns; they will be automatically mapped to a single `uniqueidentifier` value for standard Rhetos reference property.
* **LegacyPropertyReadOnly** `<Property> 'column'` - Mapping a read-only property to a column in source view.

[Polymorphic](Polymorphic-concept):

* **Polymorphic** `<Module>.<name>` - A common interface that can be implemented by multiple entities.
* **Is** `<subtype DataStructure>.<Polymorphic>` - Data structure is a subtype (an implementation) of the given polymorphic.
* **Implements** `<Is>.<Property> 'SQL expression'` - Implement a property by a specific SQL expression.
* **Implements** `<Is>.<Property> <HardcodedEntry>` - Implement a property by a hardcoded entity entry.
* **Where** `<Is>.<expression>` - Is is used to limit the items that will be included in the polymorphic implementation.
* **Materialized** `<Polymorphic>` - Manually creates a materialized table, when there are no references or extensions to the polymorphic
* **SqlImplementation** `<Is> 'sqlQuery'` - Instead of using property implementations (`Implements` keyword), a specific SQL query may be provided to implement the mapping between the subtype and the polymorphic entity.

C# interface implementation.
These concepts help keeping the algorithm implementations independent of the generated object model,
by providing statically-typed querying and saving of generated object model entities,
without referencing the generated assembly.

* **Implements** `<DataStructure>.<interface type>` - Data structure's POCO class implements the given C# interface.
* **ImplementsQueryable** `<DataStructure>.<interfaceType>` - Data structure's queryable class implements the given C# interface.
* **RegisteredImplementation** `<Implements or ImplementsQueryable>` - Registers the data structure (and it's repository) as the *default* implementation of the given interface. This allows easy access the data structure's repository by using `GenericRepository<ThisInterface>` from dependency injection.

Property templates and dependencies:

* **PropertyFrom** `<destination DataStructure>.<source Property>` - Copies property from another data structure, along with the associated Required and SqlIndex concepts.
* **AllPropertiesFrom** `<destination DataStructure>.<source DataStructure>` - Copies all properties from another data structure, along with the associated Required, SqlIndex and Extends concepts.
* **AllPropertiesWithCascadeDeleteFrom** `<destination DataStructure>.<source DataStructure>` - Copies all properties from another data structure, along with the associated Required, SqlIndex, Extends and CascadeDelete concepts.
* **PrerequisiteAllProperties** `<Entity>` - This concept is used as a placeholder for internal optimization when all properties of an entity are required as a prerequisite for another concept.
A dependent object can reference this concept as a dependency, instead of referencing each property individually.

Other:

* **Write** `<DataStructure> 'saveImplementation'` - Adds a custom Save method to data structure that is not writable by default.

## Simple business rules

See the full article: [Implementing simple business rules](Implementing-simple-business-rules).

Property value constraints:

* **Required** `<Property>` - The property value must be entered when saving a record. There are two subvariant of this concept:
  * **SystemRequired** `<Property>` - The value must be entered by system internally.
  * **UserRequired** `<Property>` - User (or client applications) needs to provide the property value.
  * **RequiredAllowSave** `<Property>` - Required property, but suppress the validation on save to be verified later (see `AllowSave`).
* **Unique** - `<Property>` - Two records cannot have same value of this property.
  * **UniqueMultiple** `<DataStructure>.<property names separated by comma>` - A unique constraint over multiple properties: Two records cannot have same combination of values.
* **MinValue** `<Property>` - Limits the smallest allowed value of the property.
* **MaxValue** `<Property>` - Limits the largest allowed value of the property.
* **MinLength** `<Property>` - Limits the string length in ShortString or LongString property.
* **MaxLength** `<Property>` - Limits the string length in ShortString or LongString property.
* **Range** `<PropertyFrom> <PropertyTo>` - Value of the first property has to be less or equal to the second property (properties have to be of the same type).
  * **DateRange** `<PropertyFrom> <PropertyTo>` - Inherits the Range concept and generates a Date property in case it does not exist already.
  * **DateTimeRange** `<PropertyFrom> <PropertyTo>` - Inherits the Range concept and generates the DateTime properties in case they don't exist already.
  * **IntegerRange** `<PropertyFrom> <PropertyTo>` - Inherits the Range concept and generates the Integer properties in case they don't exist already.
* **RegExMatch** `<Property> <pattern> <error message>` - Use a regular expression to validate the string property value.

Deny data modifications:

* [**InvalidData**](Data-validations) `<Entity>.<filter name> 'errorMessage'` - Standard data validation. When saving data, if any record matches the given filter, the operation will be canceled with and the error message returned to the user.
  * **AllowSave** `<InvalidData>` - Modifies the `InvalidData` concept to suppress data validation on save. Instead, the data validation can be excepted separately as a report.
  * **DenySave** - Obsolete. Use InvalidData instead.
  * **MarkProperty** `<InvalidData> <Property>` - If the error is related to the single property, use this to add that information to the validation
  * **ErrorMetadata** `<InvalidData>.<key> 'value'` - Adds any custom metadata information to the error response. This metadata may be used in frontend to display the error message in a certain way.
  * **MessageParametersItem** `<InvalidData> 'messageParameters'` - Extends the validation's error message with custom parameter values.
  * **MessageParametersConstant** `<InvalidData> 'messageParameters'` - It has subset of the features of `MessageParametersItem`. It works in a similar way, but it can only provide constant values.
  * **MessageFunction** `<InvalidData> 'messageFunction'` - Allows full control over validation's error message and metadata. It is implemented as a lambda expression the returns the error message and metadata for a given list of invalid record IDs.
* **Lock** `<Entity>.<filter name> 'message'` - Deny update and delete of the entity records, for records in a certain state (provided by a filter).
* **Lock** `<Entity>.<filter name> 'message' <reportProperty>` - Deny update and delete of the entity records, for records in a certain state (provided by a filter). The given property is not used in locking, it is just reported to the user (the client application) as a reason for the lock.
* **LockProperty** `<Property>.<filter name> 'message'` - Deny update of a property, for records in a certain state.
* **LockExcept** `<Entity>.<filter name> 'message' 'exceptProperties'` - Deny update (except for properties from the provided list) and delete of the entity records, for records in a certain state.
* **DenyUserEdit** `<Entity>` - Client application is not allowed to directly insert, update or delete the entity records (no condition).
* **DenyUserEdit** `<Property>` - Client application is not allowed to directly insert or update the property.

Automatically generated data:

* **AutoCode** `<ShortString or Integer>` - Automatically generate numeric codes. The codes can have a given string prefix and a fixed number of digits. It generates Unique constraint on the property.
* **AutoCodeForEach** `<ShortString or Integer> <group by Property>` - Same as `AutoCode`, but the numbers are starting from 1 within each group of records. The group is defined by the second property value.
* **AutoCodeCached** `<ShortString>` - An optimized version of `AutoCode` for large tables. It stores the latest used code, so it does not need to read the existing records when generating a new code, but it requires manual initialization the persisted data at initial deployment or import database records.
* **AutoCodeForEachCached** `<ShortString> <group by Property>` -  Equivalent to `AutoCodeForEach` with cached last code values.
* **CreationTime** `<DateTime property>` - Automatically enters time when the records was created.
* **CreatedBy** `<Reference to Common.Principal>` - Writes the current user's ID when saving a new record.
* **ModificationTimeOf** `<DateTime property> <Modified property>` - Automatically enters time when some given property was last updated.
* **DefaultValue** `<Property> 'lambda'` - for setting the default property values when inserting a new record.

Logging data changes and auditing:

* **Logging** `<entity>` - Creates a database trigger that monitors all inserts, updates and deletes, and writes them to `Common.Log` table.
* **Log** `<Logging <Property>` - Sets properties which changes are tracked.
* **AllProperties** `<Logging>` - Enables logging on all properties.
* **RelatedItem** `<Logging>.<parentTable>.<referenceColumn>.<relationName>` - Connect log records between two entities. This concept is used automatically to include details and extension log records. Read the connected log records with SqlQueryable `Common.RelatedEventsSource`.
* **LogReaderAdditionalSource** `<SqlQueryable>.<name> 'snippet'` - Enables implementation of a custom Log archive. The archive can be integrated into the existing auditing features by extending `LogReader` and `LogRelatedItemReader`. A low-level concept that inserts the SQL code snippet to the log reader SqlQueryable at the place of the given tag (an SQL comment).

Other features:

* **Deactivatable** `<Entity>` - Allows tracking of active and deactivated records. Generates property `Bool Active`.
* **PessimisticLocking** `<DataStructure>` - Enables automatic verification of explicit client locks when saving a record. Generates server actions SetLock and ReleaseLock.
* **PessimisticLockingParent** `<Reference> <detail PessimisticLocking>` - Lock on parent automatically locks all detail records. Use this concept to include additional detail entities that have a reference to the parent entity, but is not marked as Detail.

## Computed data and read-only data structures

[Read-only data structures](Read-only-data-structures):

* **Computed** `<Module>.<name> <lambda>` - A readably data structure, implemented with a C# code (the lambda expression) that returns an array of the records: `repository => array of records`.
* **SqlQueryable** `<Module>.<name> <SQL script>` - A queryable data structure, implemented with an SQL query. It generates a database view. With this concept, you should always use SqlDependsOn or AutodetectSqlDependencies to make sure that database objects can be created in the correct order.
* **QueryableExtension** `<Module>.<name> <source DataStructure> <lambda>` - A queryable data structure, implemented with a C# code (the lambda expression), for extending entities with simple computed data. The lambda expression returns records as a query: `(IQueryable<BaseEntity> source, repository) => IQueryable<Extension>`.

Additional concepts:

* **ExternalReference** `<Module>.<type or assembly>` - Adds the DLL reference for the generated application. The DLL can be referenced in two ways:
  * (Recommended) By C# type which is used (the assembly qualified name). Version, Culture or PublicKeyToken can be removed from the AssemblyQualifiedName for DLLs that are placed in the Rhetos application folder.
  * By DLL name (e.g. 'Rhetos.MyFunctions.dll').
* **UseExecutionContext** `<computation>` - Adds an additional input parameter "ExecutionContext" to the Computed or QueryableExtension lambda expression.
  This concept is obsolete, repository member `_executionContext` should be used instead.

[Caching the computed data](Persisting-the-computed-data):

* **Persisted** `<Module>.<name> <source DataStructure>` - Creates entity which will contain cached data from the given source. The source can be any readable data structure (Browse, SqlQueryable, Computed and similar).
  * **AllProperties** `<Persisted>` - Copies all properties from source data structure to the cache entity, along with the associated Required, SqlIndex, Extends and CascadeDelete concepts.
  * **KeyProperties** `<Persisted> 'keyProperties'` - List of properties for matching source and target records. It controls when to update an item or to delete old item and insert a new one.
  * **KeepSynchronized** `<Persisted>` - Automatically updates cache when the source data is changed. This feature requires ChangesOnChangedItems defined on the source.
  * **KeepSynchronized** `<Persisted> <saveFilter>` - Same as above, but leaving some computed records unchanged. The "save filter" is a lambda expression `(IEnumerable<Entity> items, repository) => IEnumerable<Entity>`, that returns subset of items which are allowed to be updated by the KeepSynchronized mechanism.
  * **ComputeForNewBaseItems** `<Persisted>` - Automatically updates cache when a base record is inserted. Automatically enabled when the cache is an extension of an entity.
  * **ComputeForNewBaseItems** `<Persisted> 'filterSaveExpression'` - Automatically updates cache when a base record is inserted for items that pass the given filter.

* **ComputedFrom** `<target Entity>.<source DataStructure>` - A more flexible version of `Persisted`. It allows a property-level recomputing instead of entity-level. It is intended to be used as an internal concept for building simpler macro concepts.
  * **AllProperties** `<ComputedFrom>` - Copies all properties from source data structure to the cache entity, along with the associated Required, SqlIndex, Extends and CascadeDelete concepts.
  * **KeyProperties** `<ComputedFrom> 'keyProperties'` - List of properties for matching source and target records. It controls when to update an item or to delete old item and insert a new one.
  * **KeyPropertyID** `<ComputedFrom>` - (Set by default) ID property will be used for matching source and target records. It controls when to update an item or to delete old item and insert a new one.
  * **KeyProperty** `<ComputedFrom Property>` - Property for matching source and target records. It controls when to update an item or to delete old item and insert a new one.
  * **SkipRecomputeOnDeploy** `<ComputedFrom>` - for disabling recompute-on-deploy for a specific entity in the DSL script (issue #105).
  * **ComputedFrom** `<target Property>.<source Property>` - Mapping for a target property to the source property. Not needed if using `AllProperties`.
  * **KeepSynchronized** `<ComputedFrom>` - Automatically updates cache when the source data is changed. This feature requires ChangesOnChangedItems defined on the source.
  * **KeepSynchronized** `<ComputedFrom> 'saveFilter'` - Same as above, but leaving some computed records unchanged. The "save filter" is a lambda expression `(IEnumerable<Entity> items, repository) => IEnumerable<Entity>`, that returns subset of items which are allowed to be updated by the KeepSynchronized mechanism.
  * **DefaultLoadFilter** `<ComputedFrom> 'loadFilter'` - Limits automatic computation on a subset of rows on `KeepSynchronized`.
  * **SuppressSynchronization** `<KeepSynchronized>` - Internal concept for turning off automatic recompute of an entity with KeepSynchronized.
  * **ComputeForNewBaseItems** `<ComputedFrom>` - Automatically updates cache when a base record is inserted. Automatically enabled when the cache is an extension of an entity.
  * **ComputeForNewBaseItems** `<ComputedFrom> 'filterSaveExpression'` - Automatically updates cache when a base record is inserted, but only for items that pass the given filter.
  * **ComputeForNewItems** `<ComputedFrom>` - Automatically updates cache properties when a record is inserted into the cache entity. This feature is intended for "hybrid" entities that have some computed properties, but also allow direct data entry.
  * **ComputeForNewItems** `<ComputedFrom> 'filterSaveExpression'` - Same as above, but only for items that pass the given filter.

Defining dependencies for the computation source, so that KeepSynchronized can know when to update the cached data:

* **ChangesOnBaseItem** `<ComputationSource>` - If the computation is an extension of a base entity: When a base record is saved, the related cache record should be recomputed.
* **ChangesOnLinkedItems** `<ComputationSource> <ReferenceProperty>` - If the computation is an aggregation of a detail entity: When a detail record is saved, the related parent's cache record should be recomputed.
  * For example, if you are computing additional data about a document and that data depends on a detail entity (for example, the number of items, or the total amount) then the parameter "ReferenceProperty" should be the full name of the reference property from the detail entity.
* **ChangesOnReferenced** `<ComputationSource> <path to referenced entity>` - If the computation depends on a referenced entity: When a referenced entity record is saved, all cache records that reference it should be recomputed. Instead of a simple property, it is possible to specify a path across multiple references, separated by a dot, including the `Base` and `Extension_...` navigation properties.
* **ChangesOnChangedItems** `<ComputationSource> <entity> <filter name> <filter snippet>` - Programmable concept for defining dependency for computed items.
  * The "filter snippet" is a lambda expression that for an array modified dependent items returns filter parameter "what cached items need to be recomputed": `DependentEntity[] changedItems => filter parameter`.
  * The filter has to be applicable to both source and cache data structure. FilterAll, System.Guid[] and FilterCriteria are commonly used filters, supported by all entities.
  * Examples:
    * If *any* change of the dependent entity should result with recomputing *all* cache records, it can be declared this way: `ChangesOnChangedItems Test.Item 'FilterAll' changedItems => new FilterAll()';`
    * ChangesOnBaseItem generates:
      `ChangesOnChangedItems Test.Item 'Guid[]' 'changedItems => changedItems.Select(item => item.ID).ToArray()';`
    * ChangesOnLinkedItems generates:
      `ChangesOnChangedItems Test.Item 'Guid[]' 'changedItems => changedItems.Where(item => item.ParentID != null).Select(item => item.ParentID.Value).Distinct().ToArray()';`
    * ChangesOnReferenced generates something similar to:
      `ChangesOnChangedItems Test.Item 'FilterCriteria' 'changedItems => new FilterCriteria("path to referenced entity", "In", changedItems.Select(item => item.ID))';`
* **KeyProperties** - A list of properties that are used as a key when comparing the data from source to the cache. By default, the data is matched by ID.

## Filters and other read methods

See the full article: [Developing filters and other read methods](Filters-and-other-read-methods).

* **FilterBy** `<DataStructure>.<parameter type> 'lambda'` - A read method that loads and returns data for the given parameter value.
  The lambda expression returns an array of records: `(repository, parameter) => filtered DataStructure[]`.
  The parameter type also represents the filter name.
* **Query** `<DataStructure>.<parameter type> 'lambda'` - It is similar to the FilterBy described above, it just returns a query instead of a simple array.
  * **BeforeQuery** `<Query> 'codeSnippet'` - Low-level concept that adds custom code to be executed before each query.
* **ComposableFilterBy** `<DataStructure>.<parameter type> <lambda>` - A read method that returns a filtered query for the given source query and the parameter value.
  The lambda expression returns a subset of a given query: `(IQueryable<DataStructure> query, repository, parameter) => filtered IQueryable<DataStructure>`.
  The parameter type also represents the filter name.
  * **ComposableFilterByReferenced** `<source DataStructure>.<parameter> <referenceFromMe Reference>` - For inheriting filters from referenced data structure.
  * **ComposableFilterByReferenced** `<source DataStructure>.<parameter> <referenceFromMe Reference> 'subFilterExpression'` - For inheriting filters from referenced data structure. Use subFilterExpression to additionally filter out some items or sort the items within a group with the same reference value.
* **ItemFilter** `<DataStructure>.<filter name> <lambda>` - Helper concept for simplified definition of simple "one-liner" filters, that generates a ComposableFilterBy.
  The lambda expression returns whether each records passes the filter: `item => bool`.
  * **ItemFilterReferenced** `<source DataStructure>.<filterName> <referenceFromMe Reference>` - Inherits filters from referenced data structure.
  * **ItemFilterReferenced** `<source DataStructure>.<filterName> <referenceFromMe Reference> 'subFilterExpression'` - Inherits filters from referenced data structure.  Use subFilterExpression to additionally filter out some items or sort the items within a group with the same reference value.

Additional concepts:

* **Parameter** - Data structure for FilterBy and ComposableFilterBy parameters. It also represents the filter name.
  Although any data structure can be used as filter parameter, the Parameter concept describes an intention behind the data structure.
* **UseExecutionContext** `<FilterBy>` - Adds an additional input parameter "ExecutionContext" to the filter's lambda expression.
  This concept is obsolete, repository member `_executionContext` should be used instead.
* **FilterByReferenced** `<detail DataStructure>.<parameter type> <parent Reference> <lambda>` - Copies a FilterBy filter implementation from the parent data structure to the detail.
  The lambda expression can contain additional data processing of the filtered items: `IEnumerable<Detail> => .. additional filter or sort from group with the same parent`.
* **FilterByLinkedItems** `<parent DataStructure>.<parameter type> <detail Reference>'` -  Copies a FilterBy filter from a detail data structure to the parent.
* **FilterByBase** `<extension DataStructure>.<parameter type>` - Copies a FilterBy filter from base data structure.
* **ApplyFilterOnClientRead** `<DataStructure>.<filterName>` - The given filter will be automatically applied when reading data on each web request.
* **ApplyFilterOnClientRead** `<DataStructure>.<filterName> 'where'` - The given filter will be automatically applied when reading data on each web request.
* **ApplyOnClientRead** `<ItemFilter or ComposableFilterBy>` - The given filter will be automatically applied when reading data on each web request.

Beside these explicitly defined filters, generic filters are available in [Web API](https://github.com/Rhetos/RestGenerator/blob/master/Readme.md#reading-data)
for all queryable data structures (Entity, Browse, SqlQueryable, QueryableExtension, ...).

## Reports

* **ReportFile** `<Module>.<name> <lambda>` - The lambda expression returns an arbitrary generated file (file name and contents as byte array), based on the report data collected by DataSources.
  The lambda expression returns the file:  `(object[][] reportData, string convertFormat, executionContext) => new Rhetos.Dom.DefaultConcepts.ReportFile {string Name, byte[] Content}`
  * Report is also a data structure. Properties on the report represent report parameters.
  * The report is available in Web API.
* **ReportData** `<Module>.<name>` - A subset of ReportFile features: allows downloading the raw report data, without generating the report file. In the object model, only `GetReportData` method is generated.
* **DataSources** `<Report>.<comma separated data structures>` - List of readable data structures that provide the data for the report. The module name is optional.
  * Each provided data source should have a FilterBy implementation with the filter parameter name same as the report name.
  * It is recommended to use FilterByBase, FilterByReferenced and FilterByLinkedItems, to avoid writing redundant filters on related structures (e.g. report may filtered documents and the related detail items).
* **DataSource** `<Report>.'order' <DataStructure>` - Definition of a single data source for the report. Use the DataSources concept instead, it automatically generates the DataSource statements.

## Complex concepts

Hierarchy:

* **Hierarchy** `<DataStructure>.<Reference name>` - Adds a self-reference property (for example, a superior in the employee hierarchy).
  * Generates a cached index for optimized recursive queries (for example, find all direct and indirect subordinates) in the extension `<EntityName><HierarchyName>Hierarchy`.
  * Generates ComposableFilters `<HierarchyName>HierarchyDescendants` and `<HierarchyName>HierarchyAncestors` for quick access of all direct and indirect child records or parents.
  * Generates validations to deny entering data with circular dependencies.
* **Hierarchy** `<DataStructure>.<Reference name> <PathName> <PathProperty> <PathSeparator>` - Same as Hierarchy above, with additionally cached full path for each record.
* **SingleRoot** `<Hierarchy>` - Limits insert to only one root record.

[History](Temporal-data-and-change-history):

* **History** `<Entity>` - Enables temporal data management on the entity:
  Automatically keeps old versions of each records.
  Allows reading record's state at a given point in time.
  Allow entering data values that were effective from a previous point in time.
* **History** `<Property>` - Includes the entity's property in temporal data management.
* **AllProperties** `<History>` - Includes all properties in temporal data management.

## Server actions

[Action concept](Action-concept):

* **Action** `<Module>.<name> <lambda>` - A custom server action that executes the code in the given lambda expression: `(parameter, repository, userInfo) => { C# code }`.
  The properties on the action are available in the lambda expression as the first parameter.
  The action is available in Web API.
* **UseExecutionContext**  `<Action>` - Adds an additional input parameter "ExecutionContext" to the lambda expression.
  This concept is obsolete, repository member `_executionContext` should be used instead.
* **BeforeAction**  `<Action>.<name> <code snippet>` - It allows you to add a code snippet that will be executed before the Action.

## Claims and permissions

See more on related topics in article [User authentication and authorization](User-authentication-and-authorization).

[Basic permissions](Basic-permissions):

* **CustomClaim** `<custom object name> <custom action or claim right>` - Add an additional security claim.
  It can be assigned by administrator to a user or a role, and verified by IAuthorizationManager.
  Note: in the DSL script it must be placed outside of a Module.

[RowPermissions](RowPermissions-concept):

* **RowPermissions** `<DataStructure>` - Restricts access for selected users to a subset of the entity's records.
  * **AutoInheritRowPermissions** `<Module>` - Each detail data structure in the module will inherit row permissions from it's mater data structure. Each extension in the module will inherit row permissions from it's base data structure.
  * **AutoInheritRowPermissionsInternally** `<Module>` - Similar to `AutoInheritRowPermissions` but it does not inherit row permissions from other modules.
  * **Allow** `<RowPermissions>.<ruleName> 'filterExpressionFunction'` - Allow read and write access to selected records.
  * **AllowRead** `<RowPermissions>.<ruleName> 'filterExpressionFunction'` - Allow read access to selected records.
  * **AllowWrite** `<RowPermissions>.<ruleName> 'filterExpressionFunction'` - Allow write access to selected records.
  * **Deny** `<RowPermissions>.<ruleName> 'filterExpressionFunction'` - Deny read and write access to selected records.
  * **DenyRead** `<RowPermissions>.<ruleName> 'filterExpressionFunction'` - Deny read access to selected records.
  * **DenyWrite** `<RowPermissions>.<ruleName> 'filterExpressionFunction'` - Deny write access to selected records.
  * **InheritFrom** `<RowPermissions>.<ReferenceProperty>` - Inherits row permissions from the referenced "parent" data structure.
  * **InheritFromBase** `<RowPermissions>` - Inherits row permissions from base data structure. Can be used on Browse or any entity with Extends.
  * **SamePropertyValue** `<derivedProperty Property>.<path to base property>` - Optimization of generated row-permissions filter when a property of one data structure returns the same value as a property of referenced (base or parent) data structure.
* Direct implementation of row-permissions filter:
  * **RowPermissionsRead** `<source DataStructure> 'expression'` - Direct implementation of row permission filter, without extendable rules such as AllowRead and Deny. Alternative to extendable **RowPermissions** concept.
  * **RowPermissionsWrite** `<source DataStructure> 'expression'` - Direct implementation of row permission filter, without extendable rules such as AllowRead and Deny. Alternative to extendable **RowPermissions** concept.

## Low-level object model concepts

See the full article: [Low-level object model concepts](Low-level-object-model-concepts).

One of the basic principles in Rhetos framework is to allow developers to work in a classic way, coding the features directly in C# or SQL, by using the low-level concepts.
However, a good rule of thumb is to *avoid* these low-level concepts if you are implementing a standard business pattern.
Seeing low-level concepts in DSL scripts is a sign that we are not looking at a standard feature, but **a very specific uncommon feature**.
For example, if the purpose of the feature is "data validation", please use the InvalidData concept instead.

* **SaveMethod** `<Entity>` - Allows developers to extend entity's Save method, by injecting a custom C# code that will be executed when saving the records (inserting, updating and deleting). There are different extension points at different positions in the Save method, that are intended for inserting a code with different purpose
  * **ArgumentValidation** `<SaveMethod>.<ruleName> 'csCodeSnippet'` - Verify if the parameters could break the rest of the Save method's business logic. Use `OnSaveValidate` instead for standard data validations.
  * **Initialization** `<SaveMethod>.<ruleName> 'csCodeSnippet'` - Initialize or change the data, before saving it to the database. If possible, use `DefaultValue` instead.
  * **OldDataLoaded** `<SaveMethod>.<ruleName> 'csCodeSnippet'` - Initialize or change the data, before saving it to the database, if previous data state needs to be considered. See related LoadOldItems concept.
  * **OnSaveUpdate** `<SaveMethod>.<ruleName> 'csCodeSnippet'` - Modify data in other dependent entities that needs to be updated (recomputed) after the current Save operation. If possible, use `ComputedFrom` instead.
  * **OnSaveValidate** `<SaveMethod>.<ruleName> 'csCodeSnippet'` - Implement a custom data validation. If possible, use `InvalidData` instead, for standard data validations, or `RowPermissions` for user permissions.
  * **AfterSave** `<SaveMethod>.<ruleName> 'csCodeSnippet'` - The inserted code will be executed after validations.
  * **LoadOldItems** `<SaveMethod>` - Simple helper for reading an old version of the data that can be reused in different business rules. It will load the old data between `Initialization` and `OldDataLoaded`.
    * **Take** `<LoadOldItems>.<property or path>` - Read old value of the selected property. Path over references can be used here to select a property from a referenced entity.
* **RepositoryUses** `<DataStructure>.<propertyName> 'propertyType'` - Adds a private C# property of the given type to the repository class, and initializes it automatically from the dependency injection container.
* **RepositoryMember** `<DataStructure>.<name> 'csCodeSnippet'` - Adds an arbitrary code to the repository class body. This can simplify code reuse between multiple filters, actions and other features.

## Database objects

See the full article: [Low-level database development](Database-objects).

These concepts can be used to implement high-performance optimizations
that require features directly implemented in database.

* **SqlProcedure** `<Module>.<name> "arguments" "body"` - Stored procedure in database.
* **SqlTrigger** `<Entity>.<name> "events" "body"` - Trigger in database.
* **SqlFunction** `<Module>.<name> "arguments" "body"` - User-defined function in database (scalar, inline or table function).
* **SqlView** `<Module>.<name> "select statement"` - View in database.
* **SqlIndex** `<Property>` - Index on a single column in database.
* **SqlIndexMultiple** `<Entity>.<list of properties>` - Index on one on more columns in database.
* **Clustered** `<SqlIndexMultiple>` - Marks the index as clustered.
* **SqlDefault** `<Property> <sql statement>` - Generates default constraint on the database column.
  Note: This concept is used only for internal features implemented in SQL procedures and triggers.
  It cannot be used for default field value when writing data to Web API or in object model,
  because the saved record will always have the property value set to NULL by Entity Framework,
  even if the value is not provided.
* **SqlNotNull** `<Property> 'initialValueSqlExpression'` - This concept is used only for internal features implemented in SQL procedures and triggers. Use `Required` or `SystemRequired` instead to implement business requirements.
* [**SqlObject**](SqlObject-concept) `<Module>.<name> <create SQL statement> <remove SQL statement>` - Create a custom database object
  that is not supported by other SQL concepts, for example a full-text search catalog.

Dependencies between the database objects need to be specified to make sure that they will be created in the correct order.
Use the following concepts to define the dependencies:

* **AutodetectSqlDependencies** `<database object>` - Automatically detects and generates dependencies (SqlDependsOn) for the given database object, by analyzing its SQL script.
* **AutodetectSqlDependencies** `<Module>` - Automatically detects and generates dependencies (SqlDependsOn) for all database objects in the module.
* **SqlDependsOn** `<dependent object> <dependsOn Property>` - This object should be created in database *after* the given column is created.
* **SqlDependsOn** `<dependent object> <dependsOn DataStructure>` - This object should be created in database *after* the given table or view, and all its columns, is created.
* **SqlDependsOn** `<dependent object> <dependsOn Module>` - This object should be created in database *after* all database objects in the given module are created.
* **SqlDependsOnID** `<dependent object> <dependsOn DataStructure>` - This object should be created in database *after* the given table's ID column is  created, but not necessarily all other columns. Use this instead of SqlDependsOn to avoid having dependencies to all properties of the entity.
* **SqlDependsOnIndex** `<dependent object> <dependsOn SqlIndexMultiple>` - This object should be created in database *after* the given SqlIndex is created.
* **SqlDependsOnView** `<dependent object> <dependsOn SqlView>` - This object should be created in database *after* the given SqlView is created.
* **SqlDependsOnFunction** `<dependent object> <dependsOn SqlFunction>` - This object should be created in database *after* the given SqlFunction is created.
* **SqlDependsOnSqlObject** `<dependent object> <dependsOn SqlObject>` - This object should be created in database *after* the given SqlObject is created.
