# Migrating from DeployPackages to Rhetos.MSBuild with Rhetos CLI

This article describes how to migrate and existing **Rhetos application or Rhetos plugin package**
from old build and deployment process (with DeployPackages) to new one (Rhetos.MSBuild with Rhetos CLI).

Before migrating an existing application to Rhetos CLI, first
**upgrade your application to Rhetos v4.0 while still using DeployPackages**.
The upgrade instructions are in "Breaking changes" section
in [Rhetos release notes](https://github.com/Rhetos/Rhetos/blob/master/ChangeLog.md).

After the update, migrate from DeployPackages to Rhetos.MSBuild with Rhetos CLI,
by following the instruction in this article.

Content:

1. [General information on Rhetos CLI vs. DeployPackages.exe](#general-information-on-rhetos-cli-vs-deploypackagesexe)
2. [Create new application in Visual Studio](#create-new-application-in-visual-studio)
3. [Apply the required changes in your existing code](#apply-the-required-changes-in-your-existing-code)
   1. [NuGet packages must contain DLLs in "lib" instead of "Plugins"](#nuget-packages-must-contain-dlls-in-lib-instead-of-plugins)
   2. [Generated application folder structure is different](#generated-application-folder-structure-is-different)
   3. [Build options are not read from Web.config file](#build-options-are-not-read-from-webconfig-file)
   4. [The "Resources" folder is not generated by default](#the-resources-folder-is-not-generated-by-default)
   5. [Custom usage of AssemblyGenerator](#custom-usage-of-assemblygenerator)

## General information on Rhetos CLI vs. DeployPackages.exe

Rhetos.exe is a successor to DeployPackages.exe, with separate commands for build and deploy.

Main differences in rhetos.exe:

* It does not download NuGet packages. They are managed by MSBuild and Visual Studio.
* It does not build the application's DLL files. It generates source code as part of
  the current project, that will be compiled with MSBuild.
* It allows custom source code to be developed and compiled side-by-side with generated
  C# source code in the same Rhetos application.

Rhetos.exe is usually executed automatically by MSBuild (for example when building the
application in Visual Studio), if the project includes NuGet package Rhetos.MSBuild.
It can also be executed manually from command prompt.

## Create new application in Visual Studio

Rhetos applications with DeployPackages were created by unpacking RhetosServer.zip installation
file, that contained the web application.

To migrate your existing project from DeployPackages to Rhetos CLI,
**backup** the old Rhetos application and **create** the new Rhetos web application from scratch
in Visual Studio, following the instructions from [Creating new WCF Rhetos application](Creating-new-WCF-Rhetos-application).
After creating the web application:

1. Add all NuGet packages to the project, that were used by old Rhetos application.
   * You can find the list of packages in *RhetosPackages.config* file,
     or your application's *.nuspec* file (under "dependencies").
   * Use the latest version of Rhetos NuGet packages,
     to make sure they are compatible with Rhetos CLI.
   * If you were using any custom NuGet source in *RhetosPackageSources.config* (e.g. network
     folders or private NuGet galleries), make sure to **add the custom package source** in
     [Visual Studio settings](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/nuget/consume-packages/install-use-packages-visual-studio#package-sources).
2. Move your DSL scripts into DslScripts subfolder in that application, and add them to the project
   in Visual Studio to see them in Solution Explorer.
3. For large projects, it is recommended to turn off automatic database update on each build,
   and run it manually from console when testing the application with `rhetos.exe dbupdate`
   (the exe is located in bin folder).
   * To turn off automatic database update add the following XML element in the .csproj file,
     inside the `Project` element. **Close** Visual Studio before editing.
     ```xml
       <PropertyGroup>
         <RhetosBuild>true</RhetosBuild>
         <RhetosDeploy>false</RhetosDeploy>
       </PropertyGroup>
     ```
4. Copy appSettings and system configuration from old Web.config file.
   Review differences between new and old Web.config.

## Apply the required changes in your existing code

### NuGet packages must contain DLLs in "lib" instead of "Plugins"

Rhetos NuGet packages with DLLs in "Plugins" folder are not supported by Rhetos CLI.
The warning will be reported on build if any package contains DLLs in Plugins folder,
but the build might also fail with `Unknown DSL keyword` error because of the missing
libraries from Plugins folder.

1. To update your Rhetos plugin package, in .nuspec files **replace** `target="Plugins"`
   with `target="lib"`, to match the standard NuGet convention.

### Generated application folder structure is different

1. Review and **update any hardcoded paths** in the existing code or scripts.
   Here is the mapping from old folders to new ones:
   * bin => bin
   * bin\Plugins => bin
   * bin\Generated:
     * assets files => bin\RhetosAssets
     * generated source => bin\DebugSource (different file names, separated by modules)
     * generated binaries are now part of the generated application's dll file
     * Note that at build-time, the generated source is compiled from obj\Rhetos\RhetosSource,
       and assets are generated in obj\Rhetos\RhetosAssets.
   * Resources => Resources
2. Most notable difference is that some plugin packages that generated custom assets
   files in `bin\Generated` folder (such as **MvcModelGenerator**) will now generate
   the files in `bin\RhetosAssets`.
   * **Modify** your build scripts and project files to look for generated assets
     in `bin\RhetosAssets` instead of `bin\Generated`.
3. Code that used legacy `Paths` class will still work (it will point to new folders),
   but we recommend to modify it to use the new classes from dependency injection instead:
   RhetosAppEnvironment, RhetosBuildEnvironment and IAssetsOptions.

### Build options are not read from Web.config file

For applications built with Rhetos CLI, *Web.config* file (`appSettings` element) can contain
only configuration settings for run-time environment and database update.
Build configuration must be moved from *Web.config* to *rhetos-build.settings.json* file.

1. **Remove** the following 3 build settings from *Web.config*.
    ```xml
    <appSettings file="ExternalAppSettings.config">
      <add key="CommonConcepts.Legacy.AutoGeneratePolymorphicProperty" value="False" />
      <add key="CommonConcepts.Legacy.CascadeDeleteInDatabase" value="False" />
      <add key="Dsl.InitialConceptsSort" value="Key" />
    </appSettings>
    ```
2. Place them in *rhetos-build.settings.json* file, located in the project root folder
   (with the .csproj file). Make sure to **replace these values** with your old ones,
   or **remove** the settings if they were not configured in *Web.config*.
    ```json
    {
      "CommonConcepts": {
        "Legacy": {
          "AutoGeneratePolymorphicProperty": false,
          "CascadeDeleteInDatabase": false
        }
      },
      "Dsl": {
        "InitialConceptsSort": "Key"
      }
    }
    ```
3. You can **keep the other** `appSettings` options in *Web.config*, or move them to a separate
   run-time configuration file *rhetos-app.settings.json* (not *rhetos-build.settings.json*!).
   * Note that there is also *rhetos-app.local.settings.json* file available for user-specific
     runtime configuration that should not be added to source repository or shared
     between environments.

### The "Resources" folder is not generated by default

1. For existing applications and plugins to work, make sure that "Resources" folder
   is **enabled** in `rhetos-build.settings.json` file with
   `"Legacy": { "BuildResourcesFolder": true }`.

### Custom usage of AssemblyGenerator

1. If your application or plugin package directly uses `IAssemblyGenerator`
   to generate files for other applications (client helpers, for example), not for the main
   application, then **add** an empty `manifestResources` parameter to make sure that
   these files are generated as custom assets, and not as part of the new application runtime.
   * If the embedded resources parameter is provided (even if empty), it will generate
     source files and compile library (DLL) in `bin\RhetosAssets` folders instead of
     `bin\Generated`. These files are consider as custom assets,
     not as an executable part of the main application runtime.
   * If the embedded resources are not provided, it will generate source files only (C#)
     as part of the main application. These files will be compiled into the main Rhetos
     application and used at runtime.
